Add OpenTelemetry traces tech note (#119)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0003-opentelemetry-traces-to-prometheus.mdx

---

> title: Connecting OpenTelemetry Traces to Prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Connecting OpenTelemetry traces to Prometheus
```

> title: Connecting OpenTelemetry Traces to Prometheus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Connecting OpenTelemetry traces to Prometheus
```

Reviewer: We use sentence casing for headers and article titles

tags: [server, observability]
---

> While traces can provide concrete examples of possible performance issues occurring at various stages of your application, it doesn't provide a broader image of how your application is performing. Thankfully, there's a quick and easy way to convert those traces into aggregated metrics without requiring manual instrumentation. To accomplish this, we'll be using `spanmetricsprocessor` in an OpenTelemetry Collector instance to automatically generate metrics from our existing trace spans. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operation traces provide insight into performance issues that are occurring at various execution points in your graph. However, individual traces don't provide a view of your graph's broader performance.

Helpfully, you can convert your operation traces into aggregated metrics without requiring manual instrumentation. To accomplish this, we'll use `spanmetricsprocessor` in an OpenTelemetry Collector instance to automatically generate metrics from our existing trace spans. 
```

> ## OpenTelemetry Collector Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
```

> OpenTelemetry offers two different repositories for their OpenTelemetry Collector; the first is the core library (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) and the other the contributor library (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib). Functionally, these two are similar in scope, however certain features not suitable for the core library are only available within the contrib library (or other third party features). To get quick metrics from existing spans, we'll be using the contrib library as we'll be using  `spanmetricsprocessor` via the associated Docker image, however we'd also recommend checking out the Collector Builder ([https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/builder](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/builder)) to easily build tailored binaries to your environment instead of relying on prebuilt images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry provides two different repositories for their OpenTelemetry Collector: 

* The [core library](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector) 
* The [contributor library](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib)

These repositories are similar in scope, but the contributor library includes extended features that aren't suitable for the core library. To derive performance metrics from our existing spans, we'll use the contributor library to take advantage of the `spanmetricsprocessor` via the associated Docker image.

> We also recommend checking out the [Collector Builder](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/cmd/builder) to build binaries that are tailored to your environment instead of relying on prebuilt images. 
```

> Once you have OpenTelemetry Collector ready to run, a barebones configuration file would look like: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your OpenTelemetry Collector is ready to run, you can start configuring it with this barebones example:
```

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
      http:
        cors:
          allowed_origins:
            - http://*
            - https://*
  otlp/spanmetrics:
    protocols:
      grpc:
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:12346

exporters:
  prometheus:
    endpoint: "0.0.0.0:9464"

processors:
  batch:
  spanmetrics:
    metrics_exporter: prometheus

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [spanmetrics, batch]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp/spanmetrics]
      exporters: [prometheus]
      processors: [batch]
```

> ## Apollo Server Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Apollo Server setup
```

> Simply add the OTLP Exporter (`@opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http`  Node package) following the same instructions [as shown in the documentation for Apollo Server and OpenTelemetry.](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/opentelemetry/) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the OTLP Exporter (`@opentelemetry/exporter-trace-otlp-http`  Node package) following the same instructions [as shown in the documentation for Apollo Server and OpenTelemetry.](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/opentelemetry/) 
```

Reviewer: (We avoid words like "easy", "simple", etc.)

> ## Apollo Router Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Apollo Router setup
```

> See the following on how to send traces from Apollo Router to OpenTelemetry Collector: [https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/tracing#opentelemetry-collector-via-otlp](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/tracing#opentelemetry-collector-via-otlp) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To send traces from the Apollo Router to OpenTelemetry Collector, see [this article](/router/configuration/tracing#opentelemetry-collector-via-otlp).
```

Reviewer: (We use this format for inter-docset links)

> ## Prometheus Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prometheus setup
```

> Lasty, you'll want to add the OpenTelemetry Collector as a target within Prometheus; it'll use the standard port for Prometheus metrics (`9464`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, we need to add the OpenTelemetry Collector as a target within Prometheus. It'll use the standard port for Prometheus metrics (`9464`). 
```

That's it- you should have access to span metrics using the same operation name!

> ## Example Queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example queries
```

> If you're familiar with Prometheus, feel free to skip, but here are a few sample queries to help explore the data structure being reported: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few sample queries to help explore the data structure being reported: 
```

- P95 by service: `histogram_quantile(.95, sum(rate(latency_bucket[5m])) by (le, service_name))`

> - Average latency by service and operation (e.g. router/graphql.validate): `sum by (operation, service_name)(rate(latency_sum{}[1m])) / sum by (operation, service_name)(rate(latency_count{}[1m]))`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Average latency by service and operation (e.g., `router/graphql.validate`): `sum by (operation, service_name)(rate(latency_sum{}[1m])) / sum by (operation, service_name)(rate(latency_count{}[1m]))`
```

Author: They're two different operations, so clarified that in the most recent commit.

- RPM by service: `sum(rate(calls_total{operation="HTTP POST"}[1m])) by (service_name)`

> ## Full Demo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Full demo
```

> To see this in action, check out the [Supergraph Demo](https://github.com/apollographql/supergraph-demo-fed2#tracing-with-open-telemetry) repository using the OpenTelemetry Collector specific Docker Compose image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see this in action, check out the [Supergraph Demo](https://github.com/apollographql/supergraph-demo-fed2#tracing-with-open-telemetry) repository using the OpenTelemetry-Collector-specific Docker Compose image.
```
